A formalized approach to establishing the connection and role of concepts
Stanislav Mikoni
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of the Russian Academy of Sciences
The establishment of the type of connection in each pair of concepts and their role in this
connection is in demand in the construction of ontological models for various purposes. In the
absence of formal models, this problem is solved heuristically, or expertly. However, the
practical knowledge of experts and their intuition do not guarantee correct decisions. Reducing
the degree of subjectivism in solving the problem should be promoted by a higher degree of
formalization of the connections between concepts.
The formalization of the connections and the role of the concepts to be compared in them is
preceded by their exhaustive description and examples of application. Three groups of
connections are considered: generic, aggregate and functional. For each of the groups it is
proposed to use their own method of analysis. The logical-linguistic analysis used to analyze
generic connection consists in extracting essential features from the definitions of the concepts
compared and in set-theoretic operations on their contents and volumes. The method is
implemented in the form of an algorithm for establishing the roles of concepts in generic
connection.
To establish the role of concepts within the framework of aggregate and instrumental
relationships, it is proposed to involve the regularities of system analysis. It shows the application
of systemic regularities of hierarchy and integrity in establishing the roles of concepts in
aggregate and instrumental connections. Varieties of functional connection differ in the degree of
influence of the factors accompanying the concepts being compared. The degree of influence is
proposed to be established by the methods of correlation analysis. The role of the concept is
changeable. It changes with a change in the type of connection between concepts. The formalized
approach outlined in the work is planned to be applied to the systematization of concepts used in
the field of self-organizing systems.