 Ferrari to power Cadillac F1 team in "multi-year" agreement
Ferrari will supply the new entry with a power unit and gearbox for two seasons before the GM team develops its own package


Ferrari has announced a "multi-year agreement" with Andretti Formula Racing to supply the Cadillac Formula 1 entry with power units upon its entry to the championship in 2026.

The team, led by TWG Global - which recently took over the running of Andretti Global - and General Motors, was provisionally accepted onto the grid from 2026 by F1 last month, though full confirmation must yet be given.

GM will run the team under the Cadillac brand and, as part of the previous Andretti-named project that was rejected as the 11th team with previous attempts, announced its intention to manufacture its own power unit to race with.

But the date given for that to be a reality was 2028, meaning a power supply was needed for its initial two years of racing.

A statement from Ferrari read: "Ferrari N.V. today announces a multi-year agreement starting from 2026 with Andretti Formula Racing LLC, regarding the supply of power unit and gearbox to the racing team led by TWG Global and General Motors, subject to Andretti Formula Racing LLC receiving written confirmation from the FIA – F1 that its entry to the 2026 FIA Formula One Championship has been accepted and approved."

GM and TWG Global last week announced former Virgin/Marussia/Manor boss Graeme Lowdon as the team principal for the project to help guide the upstart through its initial development.

The move to supply Cadillac will see Ferrari move back to two customer teams from 2026, with Haas remaining with close ties. Sauber, which is currently powered by Ferrari, will use Audi power when it becomes the German marque's works team.

Ferrari team principal Fred Vasseur added: "It's great to see the commitment of another American team, backed by one of the most highly respected marques in the motor industry, at a time when Formula 1 is increasing in popularity in the United States.

"We are delighted therefore that we will be supplying the team with our power unit and gearbox as the basis of this technical collaboration. It means we will continue to have two "customer teams" in the championship with all the benefits this brings in terms of technical development within Ferrari."

Board director, 1978 world champion Mario Andretti, had revealed a deal was struck with Renault under the team's previous guise, but the playing field had changed given the change of management at Andretti Global as well as the decision for the French manufacturer to cease its power supply in the championship and instead switch its Alpine team to Mercedes power.