On the modification of standard discourse relations set for the annotation of Ru-RSTreebank
E.Sokolova1, S.Toldova2
1 independent researcher, 2National Research University “Higher School of Economics”
The work discusses the problem of discourse annotation and the consequences of the relations set simplification for the sake of higher interannotator agreement. One of the theoretical approaches to discourse structure representation is the Rhetoric Structure theory by William Mann and Sandra Thompson [1]. There is a set of rhetoric relations between discourse units that were suggested within this theory. Modern discourse treebanks, including the discourse annotated treebank for Russian (Ru-RSTreebank), exploit this set of relations. Considering the conceptual rather than operational basis of relations definitions and the lack of strict grammatical tests for specifying relation types, the developers of these treebanks face the problem of low interannotator agreement. One of the ways to overcome this difficulty is to simplify the annotation scheme, e.g. to unite confusing relations in one relation. The developers of the Ru-RSTreebank chose this option. We discuss the pitfalls of this approach. We suggest the detailed analysis of the consequences for these decisions exemplified with the data from Ru-RSTreebank. One of the “tree-constructing” issues is the direction of a relation between two nodes. Thus, according to [17], the annotators often confuses the relation direction between two discourse units, one expressing the cause and the other expressing the result. The two different directionsmatch the two different relations (‘Cause’ and ‘Result’) in the standard set of rhetoric relations. The developers decided to unite these two relations and to suggest the only one possible direction for them. According to our analysis, the effect of this operation is that the real nuclear discourse unit that should form the basis of the text changes its status to a satellite. Consequently, the logical structure of the text skeleton is distorted. In our work, we suggest the analysis of some other cases. Besides, one of the drawbacks is that the annotation scheme loses its universality that makes it less comparable to the treebanks for other languages.
